README.md, before:

HotGuid
=======
Generates time-ordered ID in Guid (UUID) format, which includes 4-byte shard key. 

The feature of an ID generated by the this piece of software is that the shard key can be extracted out of an ID anywhere in the distributed system. This is helpful if you use ID alone to request an entity from a backend, but expect the backend to know which shard to look for the requested entity.

Why time-order is important?
----------------------------
When you massively generate transactional entities (like orders, offers, missions) and insert them to a database the order is important to avoid page splits in ordered storage structures (indexes and tables). The ordered key at least divides in half the cost of an insert versus random key.

If your database is larger than a server memory size the ordered keys saves a lot, because caching is only effective if the hot points in a storage are stable.

Check the articles:

- https://www.2ndquadrant.com/en/blog/sequential-uuid-generators/
- https://www.percona.com/blog/2019/11/22/uuids-are-popular-but-bad-for-performance-lets-discuss/

How to use a shard key?
---------------------
One case is a request routing in the backend between clusters. For instance, having a GraphQL API with `node(id: ID!)` field or REST API with `{id}` path parameter to get an entity, in the backend you take a region key out from ID and route the request to a regional cluster.

Another case is the sharding / partitioning in a database. You can use the partition key extracted from ID to query the logical partition / chunk of data. Keeping of such a key inside ID makes it possible while serving incoming request with ID only.

A combination of cases (routing + database sharding) can be implemented. For instance, [UN M.49 region codes](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/), which might be a reasonable choice for request routing, are 10 bit long. Having a 4-byte shard key, you can use another 22 bits or the whole 32-bit value as a shard / partition key at the database level. The remaining 22 bits support quite high key cardinality.

## How to use the generator?

Generate a `Guid` for a given shard key:

```csharp
Guid id = HotGuidGenerator.Instance.NewGuid(shardKey);
```

It's your responsibility to use the shard key, which is meaningful and effective for your sharding scheme.

Take shard key out of such `Guid`:

```csharp
uint shardKey = id.ExtractShardKey();
```

Don't extract shard key out from `Guid` not generated by `HotGuidGenerator`, you'll get meaningless value.

## How ID is built?

The 16 bytes value in Hot Guid consists of:

- a 4-byte *timestamp value* measured in seconds since the Unix epoch.
- a 5-byte *random value* generated once per process. This value is unique to the machine and process.
- a 3-byte *incrementing counter*, initialized to a random value.
- a 4-byte *shard key*, passed as an argument to `HotGuidGenerator.Instance.NewGuid(uint shardKey)`.

Take a note, in the first 3 parts Hot Guid just reproduces [MongoDB Object Id](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/ObjectId/), which is 12-bytes.

## How probable collisions are?

Like with [MongoDB Object Id](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/ObjectId/) you will not get the same ID generating less than 16,777,216 (2^24) ID values per second (because the counter is 3-byte long) by a single generator instance.

Take a note, that using several generators in your distributed system (usually you have an instance of the generator per service instance) is quite safe, because Mongo algorithm uses 5-byte random value to reduce probability of collisions between generators.

To have 1% probability of getting collision between generators working each at full capacity you need 23,786,20 generator instances according to the formula:

![probability_formula](./.attachments/probability_formula.png)

Check https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem, see generalized formula at https://stackoverflow.com/questions/184869/are-guid-collisions-possible.

Gratitude
---------

This code is mostly borrowed from SequentialGuid project (https://github.com/buvinghausen/SequentialGuid/blob/master/README.md). I really appreciate Brian Buvinghausen work, which includes a bunch of tests, that kept me a lot of time to make this project.

Commit message:

Switched to unix timestamp & 4-byte sharding key

README.md, after:

HotGuid
=======
Generates time-ordered ID in Guid (UUID) format, which includes 4-byte shard key. 

The feature of an ID generated by the this piece of software is that the shard key can be extracted out of an ID anywhere in the distributed system. This is helpful if you use ID alone to request an entity from a backend, but expect the backend to know which shard to look for the requested entity.

Why time-order is important?
----------------------------
When you massively generate transactional entities (like orders, offers, missions) and insert them to a database the order is important to avoid page splits in ordered storage structures (indexes and tables). The ordered key at least divides in half the cost of an insert versus random key.

If your database is larger than a server memory size the ordered keys saves a lot, because caching is only effective if the hot points in a storage are stable.

Check the articles:

- https://www.2ndquadrant.com/en/blog/sequential-uuid-generators/
- https://www.percona.com/blog/2019/11/22/uuids-are-popular-but-bad-for-performance-lets-discuss/

How to use a shard key?
---------------------
One case is a request routing in the backend between clusters. For instance, having a GraphQL API with `node(id: ID!)` field or REST API with `{id}` path parameter to get an entity, in the backend you take a region key out from ID and route the request to a regional cluster.

Another case is the sharding / partitioning in a database. You can use the partition key extracted from ID to query the logical partition / chunk of data. Keeping of such a key inside ID makes it possible while serving incoming request with ID only.

A combination of cases (routing + database sharding) can be implemented. For instance, [UN M.49 region codes](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/), which might be a reasonable choice for request routing, are 10 bit long. Having a 4-byte shard key, you can use another 22 bits or the whole 32-bit value as a shard / partition key at the database level. The remaining 22 bits support quite high key cardinality.

## How to use the generator?

Generate a `Guid` for a given shard key:

```csharp
Guid id = HotGuidGenerator.Instance.NewGuid(shardKey);
```

It's your responsibility to use the shard key, which is meaningful and effective for your sharding scheme.

Take shard key out of such `Guid`:

```csharp
uint shardKey = id.ExtractShardKey();
```

Don't extract shard key out from `Guid` not generated by `HotGuidGenerator`, you'll get meaningless value.

## How ID is built?

The 16 bytes value in Hot Guid consists of:

- a 4-byte *timestamp value* measured in seconds since the Unix epoch.
- a 5-byte *random value* generated once per process. This value is unique to the machine and process.
- a 3-byte *incrementing counter*, initialized to a random value.
- a 4-byte *shard key*, passed as an argument to `HotGuidGenerator.Instance.NewGuid(uint shardKey)`.

Take a note, in the first 3 parts Hot Guid just reproduces [MongoDB Object Id](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/ObjectId/), which is 12-bytes.

## How probable collisions are?

Like with [MongoDB Object Id](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/ObjectId/) you will not get the same ID generating less than 16,777,216 (2^24) ID values per second (because the counter is 3-byte long) by a single generator instance.

Take a note, that using several generators in your distributed system (usually you have an instance of the generator per service instance) is quite safe, because Mongo algorithm uses 5-byte random value to reduce probability of collisions between generators.

To have 1% probability of getting collision between generators working each at full capacity you need 23,786,20 generator instances according to the formula:

![probability_formula](./.attachments/probability_formula.png)

Check https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem, see generalized formula at https://stackoverflow.com/questions/184869/are-guid-collisions-possible.

## What happens on January 19, 2038?

Due to unix timestamp 32-bit overflow the first 4-bytes will start from 0. This is well known fact for many other timestamp based IDs, including Object Id in MongoDB.

Due to reusing the same timestamp value range (after January 19, 2038) there are collision probability between the old IDs and IDs generated during the next 60+ years cycle, but you are still protected by 5-byte random value and incrementing counter which makes it extremely low if you still generate very much under 16,777,216 (2^24) ID values per second.

So, for ID generation rates of thousands per second, you might reuse the same timestamp ranges over and over through hundreds of years.

Gratitude
---------

Part of my code is borrowed from SequentialGuid project (https://github.com/buvinghausen/SequentialGuid/blob/master/README.md). I appreciate Brian Buvinghausen work.
